A Comparison of Approaches to On-line Handwritten Character Recognition
Rob Kassel, MIT Spoken Language Systems Group

Speech and handwriting are manifestations of a common need for linguistic
communication.  The similar nature of speech and handwriting recognition problems
suggests that a largely shared solution may be possible.  Recent advances in
speech recognition can be partly attributed to changes in the research paradigm. 
These changes include using large corpora of common training and testing data,
adopting statistical modeling over rule-based approaches, and ensuring meaningful
comparisons between candidate technologies.  The resulting improvements in system
performance and robustness permit the study of increasingly difficult recognition
tasks. 

The primary goal of my thesis is to compare handwriting representations for
on-line, printed, alphanumeric character recognition without striving to
construct the highest-performance system.  My studies are based on a carefully
collected body of data containing some 87,000 characters  from 150 writers. 
Material was selected automatically to ensure compact coverage of significant
letter sequences.  Subjects were instructed and prompted so as to minimally
influence the writing they produced.  A time-aligned transcription was entered
for all of this data.  I conducted an authentication study to understand better
the classification difficulty of this writing.  Only 81.7% of testing characters
were identified correctly.

I examined a number of potential representations for handwriting classification
including bitmaps, projections, transforms, chain codes, and point-sampling,
paying particular attention to pen motion as an information source.  All
experiments were based on Gaussian mixture models because of their flexibility. 
The best representation features Cartesian coordinates of 10 equally-spaced
samples along the pen trajectory.  Without the benefit of relative size
information, this representation resulted in 77.2% correct character
classification on testing data.

Finally, I adapted the SUMMIT segment-based speech recognition system developed
at MIT to handwriting.  Segmentation is based primarily on pen-lifts, but strokes
are divided to account for connected character pairs.  The parameter described
above is computed for each segment and the resulting graph passed to the
recognition engine for classification and search.  This system was able to
correctly recognize 65.1% of the test-set characters.  Incorporating a bigram
character grammar with perplexity 11.3 improved this performance to 76.4%.
